---
title: Defining the Post-incident Review
date: 2020-03-05
image:
  placement: 3
profile: false
tags: ["incidents", "analysis"]
editable: true
---

To conduct a good post-incident review, you must first ensure that everyone is
on the same page. Toward that end, remember that language matters; there are
terms you should use and some you shouldn’t. Key points in conducting the review
are who to include (everyone) and when to do it (within twenty-four to
thirty-six hours). This will help you accomplish the purpose of the review: to
learn and improve.

We learn from incidents by conducting a post-incident review, which happens
during the analysis phase. You should do a post-incident review after every
significant incident.

(Placeholder: graphic of incident response lifecycle in Slide \#28)

Although the formal review takes place after the response and remediation
phases, you begin to set the stage for your analysis as soon as you receive an
actionable alert that an incident has occurred, inform team members, and begin a
conversation around the incident.

## Language matters

In conducting that conversation, and as you go through this unit, there is an
important point that you need to keep in mind: *language matters.* There are
specific terms that you should use and others that you should deliberately avoid
using. That’s because the words you use affect how you think about what happened
and can dramatically impact what and how much you learn from the incident.

This has been shown by research in safety-critical industries such as aviation,
medicine, search and rescue, firefighting, and more. This field of research is
known as resilience engineering.

Resilience engineering principles are applicable to the technology sector, as
well. In this module, you’ll learn some of the useful concepts from resilience
engineering, including four of the most common traps people fall into when
attempting to learn from failure.

## Defining the post-incident review

Not everyone uses exactly the same language to refer to the results of the
analysis phase. You might call it:

-   Post-incident review

-   Post-incident learning review

-   Postmortem

-   Retrospective

In addition, not everyone goes about it in exactly the same way. For example,
many people start by getting everyone who had any connection to the incident
into a room, while other people choose to create the review via individual
interviews and then report back to the group.

The latter method often works better when group settings in your organization
are more difficult because of group dynamics or personalities or may be based on
how distributed the group member are, or the type of incident. You should do
what works best for your team and the circumstances.

Whatever you call it and however you organize it, there are a couple of key
points:

-   **Inclusiveness:** You should try to include in the post-incident review
    *everyone who was involved* in the incident response.

-   **Timing**: you should perform the post-incident review *within twenty-four
    to thirty-six hours* after the event if at all possible. Neuroscience has
    confirmed that human memory is notoriously unreliable; people forget things.
    The more time that passes after an event, the less detailed and specific
    memories tend to be.

## Purpose of the post-incident review

The goal of the post-incident review is so your team can learn and improve. You
will want to learn about the systems and about the things that you had put in
place that worked or didn’t work, so you can make improvements.

At the same time, you should remember that action items that you generate –
reports, tasks, feedback – are useful but are peripheral to the point of the
process, which is to learn and improve. Action items are a secondary effect.

[Breaking Down the Components of a Post-incident Review](/post/breaking-down-the-components-of-a-post-incident-review/)